========
Concepts
========

For productive use of this library, the model of various chemical concepts must
be laid plain.


Symmetries
==========



Stereopermutations
==================



Molecule model
==============

The molecule data model consists of two parts: A graph, and a list of
stereocenters.


Graph
-----


Stereocenters
-------------
Currently, this library models two types of stereocenters: The first models the
atom-centric relative placement of substituents across geometries ranging from
linear to square-antiprismatic. The second type models configurational
permutations owing to bond-centric rotational barriers.

In order to determine whether a particular atom in a molecule is an atom-centric
stereocenter, its substituents are ranked according to a nearly-compliant
implementation of the IUPAC sequence rules as laid out in the 2013 Blue Book.
The rankings are transformed into an abstract substituent case (e.g. octahedral
(A-A)BBCD) and a symbolic computation is carried out to determine the number of
permutations that are not superimposable via spatial rotations within the
idealized symmetry. The set of resulting permutations of the substituent symbols
is called the set of stereopermutations. If this set contains more than one
stereopermutations, then the atom is an atom-centric stereocenter under that
symmetry.

If substituents are haptic or multidentate, an additional algorithm removes
stereopermutations it deems clearly impossible. All bridge lengths between
pairs of chelating atoms of a multidentate ligand are checked against the atom
pair's bite angle within the idealized symmetry. Additionally, haptic ligands'
cones are checked to ensure they do not overlap. Indices within the set of not
clearly impossible stereopermutations are called assignments.

Bond-centric stereocenters model rotational configurations of arbitrary
combinations of two symmetries and their respective fused symmetry positions.
The fused symmetry positions of each side effect the overall permutations if the
symmetry has multiple position groups. For instance, this is the case in square
pyramidal symmetries, where there are axial and equatorial symmetry positions.


References
==========
.. [1] Bennett, W. E.. Computation of the Number of Isomers and Their
   Structures. *Coordination Compounds. Inorg. Chem.*, **1969**, 8(6),
   1325â€“1328.
